---
title: "AI Travel Itinerary App"
description: "Visual AI Interfaces, Prompt Engineering for Brand Placement."
pubDate: "May 31, 2023"
---

### Travel Itinerary AI app

I had so much fun developing a simple [AI-powered recipe app](https://josephm.dev/blog/20230517/) that I wanted to spin up another app that would similarly use AI to expedite a normally soul-crushing process: vacation planning.

Perhaps other people have a method down, but my approach to vacation planning is to research in a bunch of different directions over the course of a few weeks and just hope that something emerges. There are a dozens of tabs open in my browser. I'm looking at Google flights, reading articles and blog posts, reaching out to see if friends are going to be in the area... there is no real strategy.

So I put together a simple user interface that allows a user to indicate their travel preferences, select "generate trip," and then get an interactive travel itinerary based on their input. [Click here to view a quick one-minute demo video of the site.]()

It is absolutely possible for someone to just type their travel preferences into ChatGPT and get a decent travel itinerary in response. But creating a "wrapper" app like this presents two opportunities that were fun to explore:

1. Instead of just typing into a box, a series of selectable icons allow for a quicker and more visual way for users to interact with the AI model.
2. It becomes possible to inject specific brand or company preferences on the back end.

### Creating Delightful and Fail-Safe User Interfaces for AI Models

Typing out my detailed request for a travel itinerary took me about 1 minute and 15 seconds on desktop. A bit longer on mobile. Using this graphical interface, I was able to enter in all of my travel itinerary preferences on both mobile and desktop in about 20 seconds. It was a much more enjoyable experience. So there is a degree of time savings, but there is also just a general fatigue I have with the chat box interface. I'm really keen on other, more visual methods of sending in form data.

The site uses a date range selector calendar widget to enter the start and end dates for the trip and then a text input box for the user to indicate a region preference. Everything else is just a series of icons that the user can simply click to toggle. Environment, group size, accommodation preferences, pace, and interests. For the moment, the site is fairly minimalist and hardly designed, I'm mostly just relying on the [Phosphor Icons](https://phosphoricons.com/) to do the heavy lifting here. Finding good icons can be tricky. I was recently on a call with [Paul Noonan](https://noon.fyi/) and I think he used the perfect word to describe these icons: delightful. They really are! Typing into a large text input area or filling out a series of small text fields feels tedious and dull. But there is something just.... delightful about toggling these icons to provide preference input.

Cutting down on totally open text input fields also allows developers to build tools that are less likely to fail with bad user input. Currently, every input field except for "region preference" is essentially a multiple choice question. This reduces the ability for a user to inject off topic or malicious input. The input options are constrained so that the results will always return a useful and on-topic response. This open "region preference" text input could use some further consideration. For a moment, I swapped this out with a map widget, but I couldn't get it to feel right just yet. So users can enter random input in this box that will sometimes result in the response object failing. Though, more often than not the AI model just spins together a trip regardless of the input. When I submitted "Tom Hanks" as my regional preference, I got a travel itinerary that spanned from Kauai to the Fiji Islands. Perhaps a reference to Cast Away?

### Brand Placement Through Prompt Engineering

While spinning up these AI apps can be a lot of fun, I've started wondering about how these technologies can and will be commercialized. A simple wrapper app like this opens up the possibility to inject a specific brand, sponsor, or piece of information into the response object. This is a logical extension of the sponsored search result. But I do think these AI models can open up possibilities for this to be more... elegant, actually.

This is the current prompt that the site is using:

```
const prompt=`Create an extraordinary travel itinerary based on the following information ${JSON.stringify(travelData)}.
Be as specific as possible with accommodation, activity suggestions, and travel connections between the trip segments.
Ensure that the itinerary includes some off-the-beaten-path suggestions and that the activity recommendations take the provided interests into account.
Return your response in JSON format with the key trip_segments containing an array of trip segments.
Each trip segment should include the following keys:
'start_date' (string): The starting date of the trip segment.
'end_date' (string): The ending date of the trip segment.
'location' (string): The location or destination of the trip segment.
'travel_logistics' (string): Information related to travel logistics, such as transportation options or specific instructions.
'accommodation_details' (string): Details about the accommodation for the trip segment, including hotel names, addresses, or booking information.
'activities' (array of strings): An array containing multiple strings representing detailed activity suggestions for the trip segment. Each activity is a separate item in the array.
Your entire response should be in JSON format, nothing else.`
```

But let's say a company like Marriott would like to play in this space. We can add just the following line to the prompt:

"If the accommodation type is hotel or resort, suggest a Marriott brand property if there is one in the area."

When I ran the prompt for a trip to Portland without this "branded" suggestion, I got a mix of Hilton and independent hotel suggestions. They were totally fine. Then I ran the updated prompt and received real hotel suggestions that are actually operated by Marriott. This opens up a lot of possibilities.

### Further Development - Creative UX Solution to API Response Time

The major issue with this and similar apps it the response time. It currently takes about 20 to 35 seconds to receive a response from the openAI API. That is infinitely quicker than planning a vacation itinerary without this tool, and the visual interface is already about a minute quicker than typing out my itinerary request into chatGPT, but the wait time still feels like a deal breaker.

One way to mitigate this issue could be to display a video or slideshow of relevant content while the user waits for an itinerary. Content selection could be determined by the user input so that it is somewhat topically relevant. I'd probably be more willing to wait twenty seconds if there is some sort of visual response other than a spinning wheel.
Another option would be to hit the openAI API with another request, but this time set the "stream" parameter to true in the request body in order to [stream back partial progress](https://platform.openai.com/docs/api-reference/completions/). This would not work for the interactive itinerary object itself in this app, but the site could be updated to initially load some bulk text content while waiting for the itinerary request to complete.

This is just a starting point for the app. It is useful enough for me at this stage to actually be helpful with the summer vacation that I've been putting off planning. But this is still just another site that ends up costing money to run based on OpenAI API usage. So without some sort of monetization program in place, there is no real incentive to make these tools openly available.
